---
layout: post
title: Online learning, and its accessibility in these unprecedented times
author: Abby Henry
---

With most universities across the nation transitioning either fully or partly to online learning due to the COVID-19 pandemic, college students’ accessibility issues have been highlighted and accentuated more than ever. While online learning certainly has it pros, such as keeping everyone’s physical health a priority in these unprecedented times, it is important to acknowledge the potential challenges that come along with it.

Before we start to unpack the more complex, intricate obstacles current students are being forced to overcome, we need to consider the accessibility of college as a whole, from an economic and social status standpoint. Higher education is very much still considered a privilege, meaning that the people who want to pursue it can only do so if they have the necessary financial means. [This article](https://www.educationdive.com/news/colleges-flock-to-online-proctors-but-equity-concerns-remain/575642/) by Natalie Schwartz provides great statistics and information regarding equity concerns especially with new college costs (such as consistent Wi-Fi access and computer hardware) being introduced over the past year. Higher education is seldom affordable; it is crucial to recognize that unfortunately, this is the reality for the majority of college students today. 

Accessibility, by definition, is the quality of being easy to obtain or use - or more simply, the ability to access something. When we take a look at online learning and its practices in our present circumstances, are they *truly* accessible?

## Accessibility concerns in the digital realm

Synchronous learning versus asynchronous learning has been a fairly popular debate as of recently. An argument could be made for either side, as each instructional method has its advantages and disadvantages. On one hand, synchronous courses have proved to be quite effective this past semester. Not only does it keep everyone safe in the midst of this pandemic, but it also still permits for that social interaction some students desire. Students can ask questions in real time and receive immediate answers. Scheduled, recurring meetings through platforms such as Zoom allow online courses to feel as “normal” as possible, as professors and students alike receive a similar experience to that of a course offered face-to-face. On the other hand, however, synchronous courses are not realistic for all students. Many have additional obligations, whether it be a job or caring for family members, that render them unable to join such meetings on a regular basis. Not to mention, synchronous meetings are almost completely inaccessible for those who may need closed captioning or a note-taker. Thus, opting for asynchronous courses - or even hybrid courses - may be more beneficial for numerous reasons. Lectures can be recorded beforehand and subtitles can be added as needed, allowing students to take notes at their own pace as well as allowing them to look back on a specific lesson on a later date. The social aspect that synchronous learning provides does not have to be entirely sacrificed, either, as discussion boards can serve as a collaborative space. 

Another current topic of conversation in the world of digital learning is online proctoring. This [tweet](https://twitter.com/LegendAriee16/status/1304098649186742273?s=20) from a fellow college student is an excellent example of the ableist undertones embedded in technology. In brief, the student’s professor expressed frustration in an email that Proctorio (an online proctoring service) had tracked too many head and eye movements during the test, and that there would be consequences if it were to happen again. There is no good reason for a proctoring service to track such movements - fidgeting or glancing away from the computer for a split second should not automatically equate to the idea that someone is cheating. Similarly, this viral [TikTok](https://twitter.com/devon_cantwell/status/1311166671315447808?s=20) by another college student shows the harmful, unjust effects of proctoring software. The student received a zero on an exam solely based on the fact that the software thought that they were talking to other students during it; the student was only repeating the questions aloud, a common test taking strategy. While it is important that academic integrity is still upheld in online learning, it is also important to take instances like these into consideration when deciding how to give an exam or quiz. Laura Killam, a professor at Queen’s University School of Nursing, describes in her blog post [“Exam Design: Promoting Integrity Through Trust and Flexibility”](http://insights.nursekillam.com/reflect/exam-design/) how she offers open book tests, that are available for a student to take up to a week (they can stop and start any time during that period). Instead of taking a stricter approach to online proctoring and assuming that students will do the worst, perhaps it is better to be flexible and open with students like Killam. After all, honesty is the best policy. 

## Where do we go from here?

Digital humanist Jesse Stommel says it best:
> We have to design for the least privileged, most marginalized students, the ones more likely to have felt isolated even before the pandemic: disabled students, chronically-ill students, black students, queer students, and those facing housing and food-insecurity. We need to write policies, and imagine new ways forward, for these students, the ones already struggling, already facing exclusion.

An obstacle many face when designing an online course is the assumption that in-person accessibility issues disappear in a digital space. This, however, could not be further from the truth. If anything, existing complications college students already face are emphasized when they are translated into an online format. We cannot not find solutions to these problems if we do not address our prior mistakes, and are willing to fix those mistakes first. 
